The process of normalization is a step-by-step process: first normal form,
second normal form, and third normal form.
This is a progressive process and
each form must be met before the next form can be completed.
There are more normal forms,
actually up to six normal form.
But most relational databases and
most data modeling design just strive to achieve third normal form.
4-6 is really just more for academic and research purposes,
and it is really not done in production.
Let's go over each one of these normal forms in the next few slides.
First normal form, how to reach first normal form?
So you want to make sure that you have atomic values.
Each cell contains unique and single values.
So that means no sets,
collections, or lists of values in a column.
Be able to add data without altering tables.
Maybe this sounds a little bit confusing,
but what this really means is by adding or removing columns.
Sometimes this has to be done,
sometimes you just have to add a column to your table just to make it make
more sense or something that data does go with that table,
and so you need to be able to alter it, and that's fine.
But if you can do that without doing that,
that's what you want to strive for.
So this would really be the last result,
really we want to just create a new table.
Separate different relations into different tables.
So for example, let's talk about these two tables we have in this example.
We have a customer table and a sales table.
We could probably combine these two tables into just one table, but instead,
we want to have logical groupings for customer and sales.
We don't want just one giant table that just holds all the information we possibly have,
even though we could probably do that,
that's not what we want to do.
Keep relationships between tables together with foreign keys.
We need a way to keep the relationships at the table that have been separated.
They're not all in one big table,
they're in separate tables now,
so we need to make sure we can still link them together by a key.
This will need to be unique.
So again, let's look over here at our customer table and our sales table.
So here we have columns such as name,
e-mail, ID, and city.
Now, over here we have a sales table,
looks like maybe we're selling something,
we have customers, we have sales,
looks like our customer,
which we have our name here,
and this is the maybe the amount that they spent on a transaction.
We could have this column in this table,
but it doesn't really belong there,
it's not really information about our customer,
it really should be separated out,
which we have to get it into normal form.
So from there we're able to join these two tables by this key here, which is name.
Now this is just an example,
we probably wouldn't want to use name as yet name is not unique.
But in this case, in our little example, it is.
Second normal form, how to reach second normal form?
Well, the very first thing that you have to do to start getting
your information and your data model into
second normal form is to be in first normal form.
You have to do that first before you can progress onto second normal form.
Again, it's a progression process.
Then all columns in the table must rely on the primary key.
Let's stop and think about that for a minute.
This means that there should be no composite keys to get fields.
I shouldn't need two elements to get a third,
if the column does not help describe the primary key,
they are just customers, sales,
employees, then it may not fit in the table.
Also if the column depends on multiple columns,
it may need its own table.
So let's look at this example here.
This is our first table,
we have Store ID, Customer ID,
Customer name, and E-mail.
So in this case,
we're going to need both the Store ID and the Customer ID to get our Customer.
Our Store ID is not unique,
so we need two keys to get our customer.
Well, to be in second normal form, we don't want to do that,
so what we can do is break that up into two tables.
One, Store ID and Customer ID,
and our customer table,
Customer ID, and then the rest of the information about our customers.
Then from there, we can easily join these tables on Customer ID to get more information.
Third normal form, first,
we must be in second normal form.
Remember, this is a process and it's an iterative process.
First, you start with a non-normalized table,
then first normal form,
and then second normal form,
and now finally the third normal form,
but we must first be in second normal form.
From there, we must not have any transitive dependencies.
Let's take a look at our example here, in this case,
we have an awards table of music awards.
So in this case, we have a row with our music awards,
we have the Grammys, CMA, and the VMAs.
Then we have the years because both of these music awards happen every year.
So we need to have both the music award and
the year to be able to know who has the winning record of the year.
In this case, so the Grammys in 1965,
we're going to get the Beatles.
Then from there we have the lead singer of that band.
Now, this transitive property,
the fact that you need both the music awards and
the year to get to the winning record of the year,
and the fact now you have this extra amount of data here for the lead singer.
As you can see, both in 1970 and 1965,
the winners were the same,
both the Beatles and the lead singer is now duplicated here.
The fact that we need to have this transitive property to
get the lead singer makes it not in third normal form.
So from there, what we want to do is break that up into two tables.
We don't want to have duplicate data in the lead singer,
we do not want to have duplicate data as we may have
data integrity issues with updating the lead singer,
we wouldn't want to do an update on this row and not on this row.
So if we separate that out,
we can easily avoid that problem.
From here, we'll have our awards table,
we will have music award, year,
and the winner, and then we'll have another table called lead singer,
the band name, and the lead singer here.
So from here, if we have to do an update,
we only have to do it in one place,
and we're able to get back our original information by joining on these two columns.